Question 3: Data Pipeline

For this part of the assignment, I implemented a reproducible data pipeline for the SupportIQ customer support insight platform.

The pipeline follows this flow:

Raw data → cleaning → enrichment → AI analysis → storage

1. Raw Data:
The raw dataset used in the project is spam_ham_dataset.csv. This dataset contains 5,171 email messages with spam/ham labels. Since the dataset is email-based, it is used as the base text dataset for customer support messages.

2. Data Cleaning:
The cleaning step is implemented in ai_support_pipeline.py using the clean_text() function. The function converts text to lowercase, removes unnecessary subject labels, removes URLs, removes special characters, and normalizes extra spaces. This prepares the text for categorization, sentiment analysis, and keyword extraction.

3. Data Enrichment:
The original dataset does not include all support-ticket fields required by the assignment. Therefore, the pipeline enriches the data by adding structured support-ticket fields such as ticket_id, timestamp, customer_id, channel, product, order_value, customer_country, and resolution_status.

This converts the original email dataset into a customer-support-ticket style dataset.

4. AI Analysis:
After cleaning and enrichment, the pipeline performs AI/data analysis. It categorizes each ticket into a problem category, detects sentiment, calculates sentiment score, detects frustration level, extracts recurring issue keywords, calculates revenue impact, and generates suggested agent responses.

The AI outputs include:
- predicted_category
- sentiment
- sentiment_score
- frustration_level
- suggested_response

5. Storage:
The processed output is saved into processed_tickets.csv. In addition, I implemented a structured database storage step using SQLite. The database pipeline reads processed_tickets.csv and stores it in supportiq.db inside a tickets table.

This satisfies the structured database requirement while keeping the prototype lightweight and easy to run.

6. Ability to Process New Incoming Tickets:
The project includes a FastAPI backend with /upload and /process endpoints. A user can upload a new CSV file through the API or dashboard, then run the processing pipeline again. The /suggest-response endpoint also allows a new customer message to be analyzed immediately.

7. Reproducible Pipeline:
The pipeline is reproducible because it can be run using clear commands:

python ai_support_pipeline.py
python database_pipeline.py

The first command creates processed_tickets.csv, and the second command stores the processed data into supportiq.db.

8. Batch vs Streaming Design:
The current prototype uses batch processing. This means the system processes a CSV file containing many tickets at once. This is suitable for daily or weekly support analysis.

In a production version, the system could support streaming or near-real-time processing. New tickets from chat, email, or web forms could be sent to a queue such as Kafka, RabbitMQ, or Redis Queue. Worker services could process each ticket as it arrives and store the result in the database immediately.

Conclusion:
The data pipeline successfully converts raw text data into structured, enriched, AI-analyzed support-ticket data. It supports repeatable processing, structured storage, and future extension to real-time ticket processing.